XG boost its extreme and its gradient
boost stat quest hello I'm Josh stormer
and welcome to stat quest today we're
gonna talk about XG boost part 1 we're
gonna talk about XG boost trees and how
they're used for regression note this
stat quest assumes that you are already
familiar with at least the main ideas of
how gradient boost does regression and
you should be familiar with at least the
main ideas behind regularization if not
check out the quests the links are in
the description below
XG boost is extreme and that means it's
a big machine learning algorithm with
lots of parts the good news is that each
part is pretty simple and easy to
understand and we'll go through them one
step at a time
actually I'm assuming that you are
already familiar with gradient boost and
regularization
so we'll start by learning about XG
boosts unique regression trees
because this is a big topic will spend
three whole stack quests on it in this
stack quest part 1 will build our
intuition about how XG boost does
regression with its unique trees
in part two we'll build our intuition
about how XG boost does classification
and in part three we'll dive into the
mathematical details and show you how
our aggression and classification are
related and why creating unique trees
makes so much sense
note 'xg boost was designed to be used
with large complicated datasets however
to keep the examples from getting out of
hand
we'll use this super simple training
data
on the x-axis we have different drug
dosages
and on the y-axis we've measured drug
effectiveness
these two observations have relatively
large positive values for drug
effectiveness and that means that the
drug was helpful
these two observations have relatively
large negative values for drug
effectiveness and that means that the
drug did more harm than good
the very first step in fitting XG boost
to the training data is to make an
initial prediction this prediction can
be anything but by default it is 0.5
regardless of whether you're using XG
boost for regression or classification
the prediction 0.5 corresponds to this
thick black horizontal line and the
residuals the differences between the
observed and predicted values show us
how good the initial prediction is
now just like unex treem gradient boost
XG boosts fits a regression tree to the
residuals
however unlike unex treem gradient boost
which typically uses regular
off-the-shelf regression trees XG boost
uses a unique regression tree that I
call an XG boost tree so let's talk
about how to build an XG boost tree for
regression note there are many ways to
build XG boost trees this video focuses
on the most common way to build them for
regression
each tree starts out as a single leaf
and all of the residuals go to the leaf
now we calculate a quality score or
similarity score for the residuals
similarity score equals the sum of the
residuals squared over the number of
residuals plus lambda note lambda is a
regularization parameter and we'll talk
more about that later for now let lambda
equals zero now we plug the for
residuals into the numerator
and since there are four residuals in
the leaf we put a four in the
denominator note because we do not
square the residuals before we add them
together in the numerator 7.5 and
negative 7.5 cancel each other out in
other words when we add this residual to
this residual they cancel each other out
likewise 6.5 cancels out most of
negative 10.5 leaving negative 4 squared
in the numerator
thus the similarity score for the
residuals in the root equals 4 so let's
put similarity equals 4 up here so we
can keep track of it
now the question is whether or not we
can do a better job clustering similar
residuals if we split them into two
groups
to answer this we first focus on the two
observations with the lowest dosages
average dosage is 15 and that
corresponds to this dotted red line
so we split the observations into two
groups based on whether or not the
dosage is less than 15
the observation on the far left is the
only one with dosage less than 15 so
it's residual goes to the leaf on the
left all of the other residuals go to
the leaf on the right
now we calculate the similarity score
for the leaf on the left by plugging the
1 residual into the numerator and since
only one residual went to the leaf on
the Left the number of residuals equals
like before we set lambda equal to zero
and the similarity score for the leaf on
the Left equals 110 0.25 so let's put
similarity equals 110 0.25 under the
leaf so we can keep track of it
and calculate the similarity score for
the residuals that go to the leaf on the
right
we plug in the sum of residuals squared
into the numerator and since there are
three residuals in the leaf on the right
we plug 3 into the denominator
like before let's let lambda equal zero
note like we saw earlier because we do
not square the residuals before we add
them together 7.5 and negative 7.5
cancel each other out leaving only one
residual 6.5 in the numerator
thus the similarity score for the
residuals in the leaf on the right
equals 14 point zero eight
so let's put similarity equals 14 point
zero eight under the leaf so we can keep
track of it
now that we have calculated similarity
scores for each node we see that when
the residuals in a node are very
different they cancel each other out and
the similarity score is relatively small
in contrast when the residuals are
similar or there is just one of them
they do not cancel out and the
similarity score is relatively large
now we need to quantify how much better
the leaves cluster similar residuals
than the root
we do this by calculating the gain of
splitting the residuals into two groups
gain is equal to the similarity score
for the leaf on the Left plus the
similarity score for the leaf on the
right
minus the similarity score for the root
plugging in the numbers eep-eep eep-eep
eep-eep eep-eep eep-eep gives us 120
point three three small BAM
now that we have calculated the gain for
the threshold of dosage less than 15 we
can compare it to the gain calculated
for other thresholds so we shift the
threshold over so that it is the average
of the next two observations and build a
simple tree that divides the
observations using the new threshold
dosage less than twenty two point five
now we calculate the similarity scores
for the leaves
and calculate the game pppp pppp pppp de
boop boop the game for dosage less than
twenty two point five is four since the
gain for dosage less than twenty two
point five is less than the game for
dosage less than fifteen dosage less
than fifteen is better at splitting the
residuals into clusters of similar
values
now we shift the threshold over so that
it is the average of the last two
observations and build a simple tree
that divides the observations using the
new threshold dosage less than 30
then we calculate the similarity scores
for the leaves and the gain doot-doot
doot-doot doot-doot doot-doot doot-doot
doot-doot doot-doot doot-doot
the game for dosage less than thirty
equals fifty six point three three
again since the gain for dosage less
than 30 is less than the game for dosage
less than 15 dosage less than 15 is
better at splitting the observations and
since we can't shift the threshold over
any further to the right we are done
comparing different thresholds
and we will use the threshold that gave
us the largest gain dosage less than 15
for the first branch in the tree BAM now
since there is only one residual in the
leaf on the Left we can't split it any
further however we can split the three
residuals in the leaf on the right so we
start with these two observations and
their average dosage is twenty-two point
five which corresponds to this dotted
green line so the first threshold that
we try is dosage less than twenty two
point five now just like before we
calculate the similarity scores for the
leaves note we calculated the similarity
score for this node when we figured out
how to split the root
so now we calculate the game dududududu
dudududududududu and we get gain equals
twenty eight point one seven four when
the threshold is dosage less than twenty
two point five
now we shift the threshold over so that
it is the average of the last two
observations calculate the similarity
scores for the leaves and the gain
doo-doo-doo-doo - and we get gain equals
one hundred forty point one seven which
is much larger than twenty eight point
one seven when the threshold was dosage
less than twenty two point five
so we will use dosage less than 30 as
the threshold for this branch note to
keep this example from getting out of
hand
I've limited the tree depth to two
levels and this means we will not split
this leaf any further and we are done
building this tree however the default
is to allow up to six levels small BAM
now we need to talk about how to prune
this tree
we prune an XG boost tree based on its
gain values we start by picking a number
for example 130 oh no it's the dreaded
terminology alert XG Boost calls this
number gamma
we then calculate the difference between
the gain associated with the lowest
branch in the tree and the value for
gamma
difference between the gain and gamma is
negative we will remove the branch and
if the difference between the gain and
gamma is positive we will not remove the
branch in this case when we plug in the
game in the value for gamma 130 we get a
positive number so we will not remove
this branch and we are done pruning
note the gain for the route 120 point
three is less than 130 the value for
gamma so the difference will be negative
however because we did not remove the
first branch we will not remove the
route
in contrast if we set gamma equal to 150
then we would remove this branch because
140 point 1 7 minus 150 equals a
negative number so let's remove this
branch
now we subtract gamma from the gain for
the route
since 120 point 3 3 minus 150 equals a
negative number we will remove the root
and all we would be left with is the
original prediction which is pretty
extreme pruning
so while this wasn't the most nuanced
example of how an X G boost tree is
pruned I hope you get the idea
now let's go back to the original
residuals and build a tree just like
before only this time when we calculate
similarity scores we will set lambda
equal to one
remember lambda is a regularization
parameter which means that it is
intended to reduce the prediction
sensitivity to individual observations
now the similarity score for the root is
3.2 which is 8/10 of what we got when
lambda equals 0
when we calculate the similarity score
for the leaf on the Left we get fifty
five point one two which is half of what
we got when lambda equals zero
and when we calculate the similarity
score for the leaf on the right we get
ten point five six which is
three-quarters of what we got when
lambda equals zero
so one thing we see is that when lambda
is greater than zero the similarity
scores are smaller and the amount of
decrease is inversely proportional to
the number of residuals in the node in
other words the leaf on the Left had
only one residual and it had the largest
decrease in similarity score 50% in
contrast the root had all four residuals
in the smallest decrease 20% now when we
calculate the gain we get 66 which is a
lot less than 120 point 3 3 the value
weak out when lambda equals 0
similarly when lambda equals one the
game for the next branch is smaller than
before
now just for comparison these were the
gain values when lambda equals zero when
we first talked about pruning trees we
set gamma equal to 130 and because for
the lowest branch in the first tree gain
minus gamma equaled a positive number so
we did not prune at all
now with lambda equals 1 the values for
gain are both less than 130 so we would
prune the whole tree away
so when lambda is greater than zero it
is easier to prune leaves because the
values for gain are smaller
note before we move on I want to
illustrate one last feature of lambda
for this example imagine we split this
node into two leaves now let's calculate
the similarity scores with lambda equal
to one for the branch we get sixty five
point three for the left leaf we get
twenty one point one two
and for the right leaf we get 28.1 to
that means the gain is negative sixteen
point zero six
now when we decide if we should prune
this branch we plug in the game and we
plug in a value for gamma note if we set
gamma equal to zero then we will get a
negative number and we will prune this
branch
even though gamma equals zero
in other words setting gamma equal to
zero does not turn off pruning - on the
other hand by setting lambda equal to 1
lambda did what he was supposed to do it
prevented overfitting the training data
awesome for now regardless of lambda and
gamma let's assume that this is the tree
we are working with and determine the
output values for the leaves the output
value equals the sum of the residuals
divided by the number of residuals plus
lambda note the output value equation is
like the similarity score except we do
not square the sum of the residuals so
for this leaf we plug in the residual
negative 10.5
the number of residuals in the leaf 1
and the value for the regularization
parameter lambda
if lambda equals zero then there is no
regularization in the output value
equals negative 10.5
on the other hand if lambda equals one
the output value equals negative five
point two five
in other words when lambda is greater
than zero then it will reduce the amount
that this individual observation adds to
the overall prediction
thus lambda the regularization parameter
will reduce the prediction sensitivity
to this individual observation
for now we'll keep things simple and let
lambda equal zero because this is the
default value and put negative 10.5
under the leaf so we will remember it
now let's calculate the output value for
this leaf when lambda equals zero the
output value is seven
in other words when lambda equals zero
the output value for a leaf is simply
the average of the residuals in that
leaf
so we'll put the output value under the
leaf so we will remember it
lastly when lambda equals zero the
output value for this leaf is negative
seven point five
now at long last the first tree is
complete double BAM since we have built
our first tree we can make new
predictions and just like on extreme
gradient boost XG boost makes new
predictions by starting with the initial
prediction and adding the output of the
tree scaled by a learning rate
oh no it's another dreaded terminology
alert
XG boost calls the learning rate Etta
and the default value is 0.3 so that's
what we'll use thus the new predicted
value for this observation with dosage
equal to 10 is the original prediction
0.5 plus the learning rate Etta 0.3
times the output value negative 10.5 and
that gives us negative 2.6 5 so if the
original prediction was 0.5 then this
was the original residual
the new prediction is negative two point
six five and we see that the new
residual is smaller than before so we've
taken a small step in the right
direction
similarly the new prediction for this
observation with dosage equal twenty is
beep boop boop boop beep boop beep boop
2.6 and the new residual is smaller than
before so we've taken another small step
in the right direction
likewise the new predictions for the
remaining observations have smaller
residuals than before suggesting each
small step was in the right direction
BAM
now we build another tree based on the
new residuals and make new predictions
that give us even smaller residuals and
then build another tree based on the
newest residuals and we keep building
trees until the residuals are super
small or we have reached the maximum
number
triple bam in summary when building XG
boost trees for regression we calculate
similarity scores
gain to determine how to split the data
prune the tree by calculating the
differences between gain values and a
user defined a tree complexity parameter
gamma
if the difference is positive then we do
not prune if it's negative then we prune
for example if we subtract gam off from
this game and get a negative value we
will prune otherwise were done
if we prune then we will subtract gamma
from the next game value and work our
way up the tree then we calculate the
output values for the remaining leaves
and lastly lambda is a regularization
parameter and when lambda is greater
than zero it results in more pruning by
shrinking the similarity scores and it
results in smaller output values for the
leaves BAM
tune in next time for XG boost part 2
when we give an overview of how XG boost
trees are built for classification it's
going to be totally awesome
hooray we've made it to the end of
another exciting stat quest if you liked
this stack quest and want to see more
please subscribe and if you want to
support stack quest consider
contributing to my patreon campaign
becoming a channel member buying one or
two of my original songs or a t-shirt or
a hoodie or just donate the links are in
the description below alright until next
time quest on